I cannot tell my story without going a long way back.
If it were possible I would go back much farther still to
the very earliest years of my childhood and beyond them
to my family origins.
When poets write novels they are apt to behave as if

they were gods, with the power to look beyond and com-
prehend any human story and serve it up as if the

Almighty himself, omnipresent, were relating it in all
its naked truth. That I am no more able to do than the
poets. But my story is more important to me than any
poet's story to him, for it is my own-and it is the story
of a huffian being-not an invented, idealised person
but a real, live, uniq:-e being. What constitutes a real,
live human being is more of a mystery than ever these
days, and men-each one of whom is a valuable, unique

experiment on the part of nature-are shot down whole-
sale. If, however, we were not something more than

unique human beings and each man jack of us could
really be dismissed from this world with a bullet, there
would be no more point in relating stories at all. But
ev~ man is not only himself; he is also the unique,
particulaJ:, always significant and remarkable point
where the phenomena of the world intersect once and
for all and never again. That is why every man's story is important, eternal, sacred; and why every man while
he lives and fulfils the will of nature is a wonderful

creature, deserving the \ltmOSt attention. In each indi-
vidual the spirit is made 'flesh, in each one the whole of

creation suffers, in each one a Saviour is crucified.
Few people nowadays know what man is. Many feel it
intuitively and die more easily for that reason, just as I
shall die more easily when I have completed this story.
I cannot call myself a scholar. I have always been and
still am a seeker but I no longer do my seeking among
the stars or in books. I am beginning to hear the lessons
which whisper in my blood. Mine is not a pleasant story,
it does not possess the gentle harmony of invented tales;
like the lives of all men who have given up trying to
deceive themselves, it is a mixture of nonsense and
chaos, madness and dreams.
The life of every man is a way to himself, an attempt
at a way, the suggestion of a path. No man has ever
been utterly himself, yet every man strives to be so, the
dull. the intelligent, each one as best he can. Each man
to the end of his days carries round with him vestiges
of his birth-the slime and egg-shells of the primeval
world. There are many who never become human; they
remain frogs, lizards, ants. Many men are human beings
above and fish below. Yet each one represents an attempt
on the part of nature to create a human being. We
enjoy a common origin in our mothers; we all come
from the same pit. But each individual, who is himself
an experimental throw from the depths, strives towards
his own goal. We can understand each other; but each
person is able to interpret himself to himself alone.