Wheat Fields is a series of dozens of paintings by Dutch Post-Impressionist artist Vincent van Gogh, products of his religious studies and sermons, 
connection to nature, appreciation of manual laborers and desire to provide a means of offering comfort to others. The wheat field works 
demonstrate his progression as an artist from the drab Wheat Sheaves made in 1885 in the Netherlands to the colorful and dramatic 1888–1890 
paintings from Arles, Saint-Remy and Auvers-sur-Oise in rural France.
Failing to find a vocation in ministry, Van Gogh turned to art as a means to express and communicate his deepest sense of the meaning of life. 
Cliff Edwards, author of Van Gogh and God: A Creative Spiritual Quest wrote: "Vincent's life was a quest for unification, a search for how to 
integrate the ideas of religion, art, literature, and nature that motivated him."
Van Gogh came to view painting as a calling, "I feel a certain indebtedness [to the world] and ... out of gratitude, want to leave some souvenir 
in the shape of drawings or pictures – not made to please a certain taste in art, but to express a sincere feeling." When Van Gogh left Paris 
for Arles, he sought an antidote to the ills of city life and work among laborers in the field "giving his art and life the value he recognized 
in rural toil."
In the series of paintings about wheat fields, Van Gogh expresses through symbolism and use of color his deeply felt spiritual beliefs, 
appreciation of manual laborers and connection to nature.
As a young man Van Gogh pursued what he saw as a religious calling, wanting to minister to working people. In 1876 he was assigned a post in 
Isleworth, England to teach Bible classes and occasionally preach in the Methodist church.
When he returned to the Netherlands he studied for the ministry and also for lay ministry or missionary work without finishing either field of 
study. With support from his father, Van Gogh went to Borinage in southern Belgium where he nursed and ministered to coal miners. There he obtained 
a six-month trial position for a small salary where he preached in an old dance hall and established and taught Bible school. His self-imposed 
zeal and asceticism cost him the position.
After a nine-month period of withdrawal from society and family; he rejected the church establishment, yet found his personal vision of 
spirituality, "The best way to know God is to love many things. Love a friend, a wife, something – whatever you like – (and) you will be on the 
way to knowing more about Him; this is what I say to myself. But one must love with a lofty and serious intimate sympathy, with strength, with 
intelligence." By 1879, he made a shift in the direction of his life and found he could express his "love of God and man" through painting.
Drawn to Biblical parables, Van Gogh found wheat fields metaphors for humanity's cycles of life, as both celebrations of growth and realization 
of the susceptibility of nature's powerful forces.
Of the Biblical symbolism of sowing and reaping Van Gogh taught in his Bible lessons: "One does not expect to get from life what one has already 
learned it cannot give; rather, one begins to see more clearly that life is a kind of sowing time, and the harvest is not here."
The image of the sower came to Van Gogh in Biblical teachings from his childhood, such as:
"A sower went out to sow. As he sowed, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it. Other seed fell on rocky ground, where 
it had not much soil, and immediately it sprang up, since it had no depth of soil; and when the sun rose it was scorched, and since it had no root 
it withered away. Other seed fell among thorns and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no grain. And other seeds fell into good soil 
and brought forth grain, growing up and increasing and yielding thirty fold, and sixty fold and a hundredfold.
The "peasant genre" that greatly influenced Van Gogh began in the 1840s with the works of Jean-Francois Millet, Jules Breton, and others. In 1885 
Van Gogh described the painting of peasants as the most essential contribution to modern art. He described the works of Millet and Breton of 
religious significance, "something on high," and described them as the "voices of the wheat."
Throughout Van Gogh's adulthood he had an interest in serving others, especially manual workers. As a young man he served and ministered to coal 
miners in Borinage, Belgium which seemed to bring him close to his calling of being a missionary or minister to workers.
A common denominator in his favored authors and artists was sentimental treatment of the destitute and downtrodden. Referring to painting of 
peasants Van Gogh wrote to his brother Theo: "How shall I ever manage to paint what I love so much?" He held laborers up to a high standard of 
how dedicatedly he should approach painting, "One must undertake with confidence, with a certain assurance that one is doing a reasonable thing, 
like the farmer who drives his plow... (one who) drags the harrow behind himself. If one hasn't a horse, one is one's own horse."
Van Gogh used nature for inspiration, preferring that to abstract studies from imagination. He wrote that rather than making abstract 
studies: "I am getting well acquainted with nature. I exaggerate, sometime I make change in motif; but for all that, I do not invent the whole 
picture; on the contrary, I find it already in nature, only it must be disentangled."
The close association of peasants and the cycles of nature particularly interested Van Gogh, such as the sowing of seeds, harvest and sheaves of 
wheat in the fields. Van Gogh saw plowing, sowing and harvesting symbolic of man's efforts to overwhelm the cycles of nature: "the sower and the 
wheat sheaf stood for eternity, and the reaper and his scythe for irrevocable death." The dark hours conducive to germination and regeneration are 
depicted in The Sower and wheat fields at sunset.
n 1889 Van Gogh wrote of the way in which wheat was symbolic to him: "What can a person do when he thinks of all the things he cannot understand, 
but look at the fields of wheat... We, who live by bread, are we not ourselves very much like wheat... to be reaped when we are ripe."
Van Gogh saw in his paintings of wheat fields an opportunity for people to find a sense of calm and meaning, offering more to suffering people 
than guessing at what they may learn "on the other side of life."
Van Gogh writes Theo that he hopes that his family brings to him "what nature, clods of earth, the grass, yellow wheat, the peasant, are for me, 
in other words, that you find in your love for people something not only to work for, but to comfort and restore you when there is a need." 
Further exploring the connection between man and nature, Van Gogh wrote his sister Wil, "What the germinating force is in a grain of wheat, love 
is in us."
At times Van Gogh was so enamored with nature that his sense of self seemed lost in the intensity of his work: "I have a terrible lucidity at  
moments, these days when nature is so beautiful, I am not conscious of myself any more, and the picture comes to me as in a dream."
Wheat fields provided a subject in which Van Gogh could experiment with color. Tired of his work in the Netherlands made with dull, gray 
colors, van Gogh sought to create work that was more creative and colorful. In Paris Van Gogh met leading French artists Edgar Degas, 
Georges Seurat and others who provided illuminating influences on the use of color and technique. His work, previously somber and dark, now 
"blazed with color." His use of color was so dramatic that Van Gogh was sometimes called an Expressionist.
While Van Gogh learned much about color and technique in Paris, southern France provided an opportunity to express his "surging emotions." 
Enlightened by the effects of the sun drenched countryside in southern France, Van Gogh reported that above all, his work "promises color." 
This is where he began development of his masterpieces.
Van Gogh used complementary, contrasting colors to bring an intensity to his work, which evolved over the periods of his work. Two complementary 
colors of the same degree of vividness and contrast." Van Gogh mentioned the liveliness and interplay of "a wedding of two complementary 
colors, their mingling and opposition, the mysterious vibrations of two kindred souls." An example of use of complementary colors is The 
Sower where gold is contrasted to purple and blue with orange to intensify the impact of the work.
The four seasons were reflected in lime green and silver of spring, yellow when the wheat matured, beige and then burnished gold.